menu
Skip to
content
Create
explore

Home

emoji_events

Competitions

leaderboard

Benchmarks

smart_toy

Game Arena

code

Data Hub

expand_more
format_list_bulleted

More

expand_more
search
​
Sign In
Register
Kaggle uses cookies from Google to deliver and enhance the quality of its services and to analyze traffic.
Learn more
OK, Got it.
THE NEUROSYNTHETIC RESEARCH INSTITUTE · RESEARCH PREDICTION COMPETITION · 12 DAYS TO GO
Join Competition
more_horiz
The 2026 NeuroGolf Championship

Design the smallest neural networks to solve ARC-AGI image transformations

Overview
Data
Code
Models
Discussion
Leaderboard
Rules
ASHLEY OLDACRE · POSTED 3 MONTHS AGO
·
KAGGLE STAFF
arrow_drop_up
2
more_vert
How to get started + Competition's Official Discord

Welcome!

Information for newbies

New to machine learning and data science? No question is too basic or too simple. Feel free to start your own thread, or use this thread as a place to post any first-timer clarifying questions for the Kaggle community to help you with!

New to Kaggle? Take a look at a few videos to learn a bit more about site etiquette, Kaggle lingo, and how to enter a competition using Kaggle Notebooks. Publish and share your models on Kaggle Models!

Looking for a team? Express your interest in joining a team through our Team Up feature.

Remember: Kaggle is for everyone. Whether you're teaming up or sharing tips in the competition forum, we expect everyone to follow our Kaggle community guidelines.

Competition's Official Discord

In addition to this competition forum, you can continue the discussion in our official Kaggle Discord Server here:

discord.gg/kaggle

The Discord is a great place to ask getting started questions, chat about the nuances of this competition, and connect with potential team mates. Learn more about Discord at our announcement here. Here are a few things to keep in mind though:

1. Discord Competition Channels are 'Public' - Don't Share Private Information

Discord channels for specific competitions are considered 'public' spaces where you are allowed to talk about competition details. Please remember that private sharing of competition code or data outside of your team is, as always, not permitted. Code sharing must always be done publicly through the Kaggle forums/notebooks.

2. Discord Competition Channels are Not Monitored by Staff - Keep Important Information on the Kaggle Forums

Kaggle Staff and Hosts running competitions will not monitor Discord or be available to answer questions in Discord. This is intended to be a more casual space to discuss competitions and help each other. Please keep important questions, insights, writeups, and other valuable conversation on the Kaggle forums.

Happy modeling!

1

Please sign in to reply to this topic.

comment
0 Comments
Hotness