     1→
     2→=== p_lewish: 52 candidate paragraphs ===
     3→--0-- ARC-AGI 2025: A research review - An introduction to ARC What makes ARC special A baseline learning architecture for ARC Key ideas and the technical report Smart vs efficient search Transduction and induction Ensembling Domain-specific-languages (DSLs) Representations Refinement Thinking models, O3, inference time compute Core Knowledge Priors ARC-AGI-2 The ARC ecosystem A conceptual framework for ARC approaches The anatomy of a test-time-training approach (LLMs) Transformer architecture optimizations TTT / TTFT Data augmentations Candidate generation and selection The anatomy of a program syn
     4→--1-- light dark twitter github linkedin ## ARC-AGI 2025: A research review 2025-04-07 / 73 min read - An introduction to ARC - What makes ARC special - A baseline learning architecture for ARC - Key ideas and the technical report - Smart vs efficient search - Transduction and induction - Ensembling - Domain-specific-languages (DSLs) - Representations - Refinement - Thinking models, O3, inference time compute - Core Knowledge Priors - ARC-AGI-2 - The ARC ecosystem - A conceptual framework for ARC approaches - The anatomy of a test-time-training approach (LLMs) - Transformer architecture optimization
     5→--2-- The intelligence of a system is a measure of its skill-acquisition efficiency over a scope of tasks, with respect to priors, experience, and generalization difficulty.
     6→--3-- - training - fully public, 1000 tasks for v2, should contain puzzles that capture all the essential "core knowledge priors" and submissions are expected (but not required) to train on.
     7→--4-- When it comes to the private test set your solution program will be presented with new puzzles that it just hasn't seen before. This is a significant difference from many benchmarks, great ingenuity and creativity went into constructing these puzzles and while they may be composed of common elements, transformations, core knowledge priors that are present in the training set, they are ultimately different problems.
     8→--5-- At the other end of the spectrum we have a whole category of approaches that come from the world of discrete program search (also referred to as program synthesis , and sometimes program induction ). One of the nice things about coming at ARC from this angle is that we can lay out a (horribly inefficient) architecture of a learning system that should solve ARC with enough compute. This gives me an opportunity to define some useful terminology for the rest of the post so let's lay it out!
     9→--6-- It wasn't until 2020 when that trade-off started to make sense for Stockfish and they moved to some sort of NN based policy . We saw a similar concept behind Go. Heuristic based brute force search was no match for humans until AlphaGo, where the breakthrough was ultimately having deep learning guide the search much more intelligently (and a lot of innovations to actually achieve that).
    10→--7-- It seems [ 1 ] that humans search smartly, and probably most people assume that this will eventually be the winning approach for ARC that can "break" the logarithmic returns of a brute-force search, but within discrete program search approaches we just haven't seen this flip that way, yet.
    11→--8-- Transductive approaches skip that step, they just go for it, generate the output based on some prior knowledge (more along the lines of just giving an LLM the examples and hoping it does some in-context learning). They do not offer an explanation [ 2 ] .
    12→--9-- For the TTT case, if you think of an LLM and its weights as a program [ 3 ] - and then at test time you fine-tune your weights to better reproduce the example problems - you are clearly doing some sort of program inference, it's just not on a discrete program. Something to this effect is noted in the technical report:
    13→--10-- One challenge with most of the DSLs is that they are hand-coded. The author of a DSL might go and solve all the ARC training tasks, and then produce a set of language primitives that are necessary to solve all the problems they have seen. Whilst this makes the search efficient, it's hard to guarantee they are complete. The ability to solve all the training tasks does not necessarily mean they have the ability to solve all of the test time tasks! This needs to be a primary objective of any DSL, be expressive enough whilst also providing a small yet useful set of primitives.
    14→--11-- The DSLs often end up being rather large, for example, ARC-DSL contains a massive 160 primitive functions!
    15→--12-- It is almost certainly the case that there is some transformation of the grid representation of ARC problems that makes them easier to solve than working on the grids directly themselves. Whether this is hard-coded, learned or otherwise, such a representation likely exists.
    16→--13-- The idea of refinement comes up in a few of the papers. If we think of ARC in general as a grid > grid transformation problem, then one obvious thing we can do to break this down a bit is to try to construct the set of repeated transformations through partial grids:
    17→--14-- This transformation function is much easier to write as a loop!
    18→--15-- Just in June, the narrative was still that solving ARC-AGI would be extremely hard. This has totally flipped on its head in just a few months. Even those bullish about rumors of Q* and other reasoning approaches would not have expected this level of success.
    19→--16-- To solve ARC it is useful to have some basic knowledge and understanding of the world, as often puzzles leverage concepts that we are highly familiar with as humans.
    20→--17-- This knowledge dependency is impossible to avoid, but to minimize the impact this crystallized knowledge has on one's ability to solve ARC tasks, ARC restricts itself to building on a minimal set of knowledge called core knowledge priors , defined as:
    21→--18-- It is very hard to come up with a complete list of core knowledge priors. They are discussed in On The Measure of Intelligence, and I'll pull out the summary of them from there:
    22→--19-- - cohesion (objects move as continuous, connected, bounded wholes)
    23→--20-- Elementary geometry and topology : this core knowledge system captures notions of:
    24→--21-- After tagging 200 of the ARC-AGI-1 training dataset tasks, I also ended up producing my own taxonomy of something kind of like priors (perhaps more like concepts) across the different tasks, you can see that breakdown here . Other taxonomies of ARC problems include Concept-ARC .
    25→--22-- There is a lot of prior work in creating expanded training datasets (beyond the 400 and now 1000 for ARC-AGI-1/2) which are leveraged by a lot of the work discussed below, notably:
    26→--23-- And more, including some simplified problem sets, such as Mini-ARC , 1D-ARC , Sort-of-ARC , Language-annotated ARC (LARC) .
    27→--24-- - Take a pre-trained LLM that is already filled with conceptual priors, and there are a variety of base models used in the papers that follow
    28→--25-- The second frequently used technique for fine-tuning dataset generation, both pre-training and test time, is to leverage augmentations of the data. You take a list of grid pairs, and apply a reversible transformation to each grid to create more problems. This is a common technique in ML and seems to be important to performance here too.
    29→--26-- - Rotations, reflections, transpositions (this seems really important for LLMs, due to how much simpler it is for LLMs to "see” horizontal lines rather than vertical ones)
    30→--27-- - Problem augmentation (transformation on output only that more fundamentally changes the problem)
    31→--28-- The first obvious area for innovating is improving upon the representations for problems and the DSLs used. Sometimes it's pure Python, most often the representations are just grids. A lot of effort has gone into some approaches to hand design DSLs, some of which are quite innovative, for example with graphs and graph transformations, or by representing programs in some latent vector space.
    32→--29-- Authors also highlight a problem I experienced myself. The RE-ARC verifier programs are so crazy that it is hard to use them as any sort of training data:
    33→--30-- One way of implementing this idea is to do program synthesis within a language whose atomic primitives are non-symbolic, and to pretrain those primitives to encapsulate the basic atoms of core knowledge. While work has taken steps in related directions ... how to engineer and scale this idea remains open
    34→--31-- Some sort of soft programs (non-symbolic), not dissimilar to what probably happens in reasoning / thinking LLMs, but could be more focused toward ARC.
    35→--32-- The paper provides a good taxonomy of various design choses for TTT , different types of loss, shared or task specific fine tuning, data generation approaches, augmentations for training and different approaches for voting / candidate selection, etc.
    36→--33-- - Transformations of the grids, vertical and horizontal flips for example, performing training and predictions across augmented views of the data
    37→--34-- There is also some good data on voting approaches across transformations, which are compared to an Oracle (that selects the best answer if present). The number of examples here is relatively low though, and no confidence bounds are given, so it's hard to make strong conclusions that differentiate between simple voting and hierarchical voting, but it seems clear that multiple augmentations are better than 1.
    38→--35-- Updates to the tokenizer to just represent 64 symbols. Tokenization is a problem, due to e.g number grouping which would probably be catastrophic (12 being treated as "12" , not "1" , "2" ). Often we just put commas, or spaces between the numbers, but this doubles the token count.
    39→--36-- Augmentations - rotations, transpositions, permutations of the colors, example order.
    40→--37-- At the end, it's ensembled with the 2020 solution (looks like Icecuber). Without the ensemble, the score is 32% (I think, the graph does not match the text).
    41→--38-- - This is done by performing random (1-8) transformations on randomly sampled grid patches in order to train a model to estimate distance
    42→--39-- ARC-AGI is fundamentally not a grid-to-grid problem ... most of the steps involved in solving an ARC-AGI task are not strictly grid-to-grid transformations and thus do not result in an intermediate grid that can be evaluated for its similarity to the target ... instead can be thought of as a sequence of intermediate program states which themselves are lists of various kinds of intermediate objects and values. As such, the grid-to-grid similarity concept only potentially allows guiding a small portion of the overall search for a solution.
    43→--40-- Restrict themselves to constant size tasks, of which there were only 262/400 . They extended the dataset using RE-ARC, they also increased the training set using invertible transformations.
    44→--41-- For instance, in the task of figure 2 above, holes are filled with yellow. If we apply color permutations, then we could get pairs where holes are colored with, say, cyan. This prevents the model from learning which color has to be used for filling holes
    45→--42-- The idea here is quite simple - get GPT-4o to generate thousands of Python programs that attempt to implement a transformation for each puzzle, with some selection process.
    46→--43-- There's not a huge amount to explain here and the paper/docs are very short. They wrote efficient C++ code for 142 unary functions (notably derived from 42 n-ary functions). They then search the space of up to depth 4 programs, searching depth 3 programs, depth 3 programs with diagonal flip augmentations, and then depth 4 programs until they run out of time.
    47→--44-- They introduce another DSL called PeARL. They created a DSL for ARC, with relevant primitives such as grids and colors, and programs map from grid > grid. This doesn't appear to be the most complete DSL, I'm not sure why they didn't use e.g ARC-DSL.
    48→--45-- The design of primitives for PeARL has a big effect on the system's performance and is perhaps the most critical implementation detail.
    49→--46-- In the end, they end up with a fairly substantial 77 primitives! This includes things like flips, rotations, transpositions, cropping, stacking, filling holes, counting colors and pixels, etc etc.
    50→--47-- Given the lack of pre-training, this is basically nearly entirely test time adaptation. Not 100%, because there is clearly a ton of priors and bias fed into the neural network architecture that is specifically related to ARC. It's clear from all the other solutions that test-time adaptation is necessary, but is it really sufficient ?
    51→--48-- Paper: Graphs, Constraints, and Search for the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus
    52→--49-- The authors here choose an object centric graph representation, and then effectively search through a DSL of programs that operate on these graphs.
    53→--50-- There is a notable observation that the procedure to generate the graph representation from the pixels is 1-many. There are multiple different "interpretations" of the grid (think e.g the classical duck/rabbit illusion):
    54→--51-- - Do a greedy search over a sequence of graph operations (program), leveraging pixel error as a metric to prioritize the best graph program
    55→
    56→=== p_survey: 49 candidate paragraphs ===
    57→--0-- The pursuit of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) requires benchmarks that can distinguish genuine reasoning from sophisticated pattern matching. The Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC-AGI) ( chollet_measure_2019 ) stands out as such a benchmark, highlighting important limitations about the current state of AI. While humans solve these tasks with near-perfect accuracy, AI systems show dramatic performance variation. Since its 2019 introduction, ARC-AGI has evolved through three progressively more challenging versions. The tasks are few-shot grid-transformation problems. Given a number of
    58→--1-- The transformation from near-zero to near-human performance on ARC-AGI-1 came from a paradigm shift away from massive pre-training and toward test-time compute. Some systems do this via program synthesis, while others primarily increase inference-time reasoning effort or sampling. This breakthrough aligns with Chollet’s hypothesis that achieving AGI requires not larger models but different architectures capable of efficient skill acquisition and compositional generalization ( chollet_arc_2025 ; akyurek_surprising_2025 ) . A central theme emerging from the ARC Prize 2025 is that refinement is i
    59→--2-- Current AI evaluations predominantly measure crystallized intelligence , the ability to apply memorized skills to familiar problems. Chollet argued that benchmarks prevalent in 2019, such as those testing domain knowledge and pattern recognition, could be solved through sufficient scale without genuine understanding ( chollet_measure_2019 ) . This observation extends to recent benchmarks: breakthroughs on MMLU, HLE, and mathematical olympiads have been achieved through scaling rather than novel reasoning mechanisms ( phan2025humanitysexam ) . Models can achieve PhD-level performance in special
    60→--3-- ARC-AGI addresses this by measuring fluid intelligence , the ability to solve novel problems using minimal prior knowledge and few examples. Each ARC task presents 3-5 input-output grid demonstrations and requires predicting outputs for new inputs. Crucially, tasks are designed to be solvable by humans without specialized knowledge, using only core knowledge priors : foundational cognitive abilities identified in developmental psychology, including object permanence, goal-directedness, basic geometry, and numerosity ( chollet_measure_2019 ; chollet_arc_2025 ) .
    61→--4-- Drawing on human cognitive tests like Raven’s Progressive Matrices ( raven_progressive_1938 ) and Elizabeth Spelke’s core knowledge framework ( spelke_core_2007 ) , Chollet’s 2019 paper “On the Measure of Intelligence” argued that intelligence should be defined by a system’s efficiency at acquiring skills in unfamiliar scenarios. He formalized this as the speed of learning new tasks given limited experience and innate priors ( chollet_measure_2019 ) . Recent computational analyses of such matrices ( Yang2023ComputationalMO ) further validate their utility for probing abstract reasoning.
    62→--5-- ARC-AGI-1 (November 2019): The original corpus of 1,000 program-induction tasks (400 training, 400 evaluation, 200 test) established the benchmark ( chollet_measure_2019 ) . Each task requires inferring a transformation rule from around three input–output demonstrations. While initially out of reach for AI systems, 2024 methods showed that, given massive test-time compute, the benchmark can be solved to a substantial degree.
    63→--6-- The Efficiency Challenge. These compositional limitations are mirrored along a second axis: current systems incur extreme computational costs when they do perform well. The benchmark explicitly treats computational cost as part of the capability signal, recognizing that human intelligence solves these tasks with minimal resources ( chollet_arc_2025 ) . Cost per task spans five orders of magnitude across systems, and even the most efficient frontier models remain 20–40 × \times more expensive than human cognitive effort (Section 4.2 ). Meanwhile, parameter-efficient approaches such as TRM (7M p
    64→--7-- This survey provides a comprehensive review of the ARC-AGI benchmark as of December 2025, drawing from 80 papers collected through systematic search, of which 65 include rigorous evaluations on standardized test sets (see Supplementary Material, Section 2, for selection criteria). We examine the benchmark’s design principles, task taxonomy, and three-generation evolution (Section 2 ). Comparative analysis identifies success factors, failure modes, and the performance cliff across benchmark versions (Section 3 ), while empirical analysis traces performance evolution, cost-efficiency trade-offs,
    65→--8-- The Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus fundamentally differs from conventional AI benchmarks. Rather than testing accumulated knowledge or pattern matching on large datasets, ARC-AGI measures fluid intelligence , the capacity to efficiently acquire new skills and solve novel problems with minimal prior knowledge ( chollet_measure_2019 ) . The benchmark grounds evaluation in a minimal set of innate cognitive abilities identified in developmental psychology (objectness, agentness, numerosity, and basic geometry) while avoiding domain-specific knowledge from mathematics, language, or culture ( spel
    66→--9-- Each ARC task presents 3-5 input-output grid pairs demonstrating a transformation rule, which must be inferred and applied to novel test cases. Grids are small (typically under 30 × \times 30 cells) with limited color palettes (10 colors) to minimize perceptual difficulty while maximizing reasoning demands. The evaluation allows two attempts per task, reflecting human problem-solving where initial hypotheses are often refined. Performance measures the percentage of tasks solved with exact match; partial credit is not awarded, as in many real-world scenarios approximately correct is insufficien
    67→--10-- ARC-AGI-1 and ARC-AGI-2 tasks (static, grid-based formats) probe six fundamental categories of abstract reasoning: object-centric reasoning (identifying coherent objects, tracking properties, and applying transformations that respect boundaries—a challenge when objects are implicit or multiple segmentations are plausible), geometric transformations (rotation, reflection, scaling, translation, and symmetry), relational and spatial reasoning (containment, adjacency, alignment, and relative positioning), numerical reasoning (counting, comparison, and using numbers to parameterize transformations)
    68→--11-- Figure 2. Representative ARC-AGI tasks illustrating two core reasoning categories. Left: Object-centric reasoning (Task f76d97a5, 3 training examples). The transformation extracts the colored checkerboard pattern from a gray background, requiring the system to identify “object” versus “background” without explicit segmentation cues. Right: Geometric transformation (Task c97c0139, 2 training examples). Red line segments define reflection axes around which cyan diamond shapes must be generated symmetrically. Both tasks require inferring abstract rules from minimal demonstrations and generalizing
    69→--12-- The original corpus, released in 2019, comprises 1,000 unique tasks divided into 400 training, 400 evaluation (publicly available), and 200 private test tasks. Each task contains 3–5 input-output demonstration pairs and typically one test input (occasionally two). Tasks exhibit clear difficulty progression: simple uniform transformations (solved by ¿90% of systems), object-centric operations with geometric transformations (40-60% success rate), and multi-step reasoning requiring abstraction (¡10% success rate).
    70→--13-- For five years, ARC-AGI-1 successfully resisted most AI approaches, with performance remaining below 20% until 2024. The ARC Prize 2024 competition, offering $600,000 for surpassing 85% accuracy, catalyzed rapid progress with over 1,430 teams competing. The top open-source system (ARChitects) achieved 53.5% through test-time training, demonstrating that architectural innovations could break the long-standing performance barrier ( arcagi3_learning ) . However, analysis of successful systems revealed exploitable characteristics: limited compositional depth (most tasks require 1-2 reasoning steps
    71→--14-- Released in March 2025 following OpenAI o3’s breakthrough on ARC-AGI-1, this version maintains the same input-output format while significantly increasing difficulty through four targeted enhancements ( chollet_arc-agi-2_2025 ; arcprize2024_o3 ) . First, tasks require deeper compositional reasoning through multi-step transformations where the state after step N depends on step N-1, making it virtually impossible to predict outcomes without executing sequential operations. Many tasks require symbolic, context-dependent pattern interpretation and rule application that adds control-flow complexit
    72→--15-- The ARC Prize 2025 competition revealed the challenge’s severity: NVARC achieved 24.03% (1st place), The ARChitects 16.53% (2nd), and MindsAI 12.64% (3rd), with 1,455 teams submitting 15,154 entries and 90 papers (up from 47 in 2024) ( arcprize2025_results ) . Commercial systems fared better: Opus 4.5 reached 37.6% at $2.20/task, while Poetiq’s Gemini 3 Pro refinement approach achieved 54% at $30/task through iterative program transformation ( arcprize2025_leaderboard ) . Human evaluation studies with over 400 test-takers found that while expert panels solve 100% of tasks, average individual t
    73→--16-- Second, cost efficiency varies dramatically and non-monotonically with performance (Table 3 ). While the current top-scoring system achieves the best headline performance at a moderate per-task cost, it represents a dramatic improvement over the prior frontier baseline from one year earlier ( arcprize2025_leaderboard ) . Importantly, this ∼ 390 × \sim 390\times cost reduction appears to be driven largely by reduced parallelism (i.e., fewer samples per task) rather than fundamentally more efficient reasoning ( arcprize2024_o3 ) . Below the frontier, systems such as Pang and NVARC illustrate tha
    74→--17-- Learned heuristics, neural nets, or LLMs prioritize promising candidates
    75→--18-- ARC-AGI-2’s primary difference from ARC-AGI-1 lies in increased compositional complexity: average transformation depth increases from 1.3 to 2.7 steps, while maintaining the same core knowledge priors and task format. Tasks still involve grids with simple geometric and color transformations, still require the same foundational cognitive abilities, and still provide 3-5 demonstration examples. The only systematic difference is that solutions require composing more primitive operations. This controlled variation isolates compositional generalization as the limiting factor.
    76→--19-- The root cause is that current systems treat composition as sequential concatenation, searching over all ordered sequences of operations. Search spaces grow exponentially with depth ( O ​ ( n d ) O(n^{d}) for n n operations and depth d d ): a 2-step transformation requires searching pairs, a 3-step transformation requires triples, quickly exceeding computational budgets. Human reasoning, by contrast, employs hierarchical decomposition that scales sub-exponentially by reducing the effective search space at each level. No current architecture implements explicit mechanisms for such hierarchical 
    77→--20-- ARC-AGI-3’s shift to interactive environments exposes capability gaps beyond compositional reasoning. The preview benchmark’s top system achieves only 12.58% action efficiency ( arcagi3_learning ) , the lowest performance across all ARC versions, revealing that static-to-interactive transfer demands capabilities current architectures largely lack: hypothesis-driven exploration, persistent memory across interaction sequences, goal inference from sparse feedback, and cross-game transfer. Where ARC-AGI-2 tests whether systems can compose known primitives, ARC-AGI-3 tests whether they can discover
    78→--21-- The emergence of large language models in early 2024 catalyzed a qualitative shift in approach philosophies. Researchers began exploring LLM-guided program synthesis, leveraging models’ code generation capabilities to navigate vast program spaces more intelligently than exhaustive search. Systems like ConceptSearch achieved 58% accuracy by using natural language descriptions to guide exploration, while Greenblatt’s GPT-4o-based approach reached 50% through carefully engineered prompting strategies. These results demonstrated that pre-trained models, despite never encountering ARC tasks during 
    79→--22-- The July 2025 preview of ARC-AGI-3 exposed additional capability gaps by shifting from static puzzles to interactive mini-games requiring exploration and goal inference. The highest reported performance, 12.58% by StochasticGoose, represented the lowest achievement across all ARC versions, despite tasks remaining within the scope of human core knowledge priors. This results revealed that capabilities developed for passive pattern recognition do not transfer to active learning contexts, suggesting that current architectures miss essential aspects of intelligence related to reasoning and interac
    80→--23-- Figure 7. Publication trends by research category. The 2024–2025 surge reflects the ARC Prize competition’s catalytic effect. Hybrid approaches dominate, reflecting recognition that neither pure neural nor symbolic methods suffice. Pure neural approaches declined after demonstrating consistent 20% ceilings.
    81→--24-- Examining performance across ARC-AGI versions provides critical diagnostic information about the nature and limitations of current reasoning capabilities. The three benchmark generations employ identical core knowledge priors and presentation formats, varying primarily in compositional complexity (ARC-AGI-2) and interaction requirements (ARC-AGI-3). This controlled variation isolates specific capability dimensions, revealing which aspects of abstract reasoning current systems have mastered and which remain fundamentally challenging.
    82→--25-- The comprehensive performance table (Supplementary Material, Table 1) presents comprehensive performance data across paradigms, years, and benchmark versions. Several patterns emerge that illuminate the current state of the field. First, paradigm choice establishes a performance ceiling but does not guarantee success: pure inductive approaches span from 2% to 79.3%, indicating that implementation quality often matters more than architectural category. Second, hybrid approaches demonstrate more consistent performance, clustering in the 50-75% range on ARC-AGI-1 while avoiding the catastrophic f
    83→--26-- Analyzing performance distributions provides additional insights into systematic patterns. Figure 8 shows that ARC-AGI-1 public scores exhibit high variance (standard deviation: 24.7%) with a long tail of low-performing approaches below 20%. The median performance of approximately 40% indicates that achieving human-competitive results remains challenging for typical approaches, with only the top quartile exceeding 60%. ARC-AGI-2 scores cluster consistently below 30% with minimal variance, indicating that increased compositional complexity creates a performance ceiling that few current methods 
    84→--27-- Adding model scale as a third dimension (Figure 10 ) further sharpens this picture: the relationship between parameter count, cost, and score reveals that larger models do not proportionally outperform smaller ones on abstract reasoning tasks.
    85→--28-- Figure 10. Score vs. cost per task vs. estimated model scale across ARC-AGI-1 and ARC-AGI-2. Bubble area is proportional to parameter count (log-scaled) and black edges denote Kaggle-constrained entries. Parameter counts marked (est.) are community estimates; undisclosed architectural choices make cross-family comparisons approximate. On ARC-AGI-1, trillion-scale models vary widely in both score and cost: Opus 4.6 reaches 93.0% at $1.88/task, GPT-5.2 Pro scores 90.5% at $11.64/task, and Grok 4 scores 66.7% at $1.01/task. Kaggle-constrained entries cluster at $0.15–$0.20/task with 660M–8B param
    86→--29-- The history of intelligence assessment reflects a gradual shift from ranking to explaining . Early psychometric traditions, exemplified by ( binet_methodes_1905 ; spearman_general_1904 ) , were designed to quantify individual differences and enable comparative evaluation. Over the past century, however, cognitive science has increasingly emphasized identifying the architectural principles that make intelligent behavior possible in the first place. A canonical example is Spelke’s core knowledge proposal: humans appear to share domain-general developmental priors for object representation, numbe
    87→--30-- ARC-AGI represents a further step in this evolution. Rather than primarily asking how well a system performs relative to others, ARC-AGI is best read as a probe of how a system generalizes from minimal evidence. In this sense, the benchmark asks not “how smart is this system?” but “what kind of intelligence does this system possess?” This framing matters because the same score can be achieved by qualitatively different routes. A system that reaches high accuracy by exploiting benchmark-specific regularities or memorizing training patterns exhibits a different competence profile than a system t
    88→--31-- When the system fails, does it fail in interpretable, systematic ways that illuminate a missing primitive or decomposition step, or does it collapse unpredictably across task families?
    89→--32-- This checklist clarifies why “higher score” is not synonymous with “more understanding.” For example, a system achieving 80% accuracy through memorization demonstrates fundamentally different capabilities than one reaching 60% by discovering compositional primitives that transfer to unseen tasks. The former is primarily a measurement of coverage; the latter is evidence of a mechanism that may scale in scope. This mechanistic lens resonates with Leibniz’s philosophical criterion for distinguishing genuine understanding from sophisticated pattern matching: one must observe whether a system can e
    90→--33-- Graceful degradation: errors reveal missing primitives/decompositions
    91→--34-- Krakauer et al. distinguish emergent capabilities (specific functions excelling at particular tasks) from emergent intelligence (the capacity to discover coarse-grained representations enabling broad problem-solving through analogical reasoning) ( krakauer_emergence_2025 ) . True intelligence, they argue, manifests through discovering “effective theories”: compressed representations that screen off irrelevant details while preserving predictive power across contexts—much as the ideal gas law predicts macroscopic behavior without tracking individual molecules, or as humans recognize that rotati
    92→--35-- The ARC Prize 2025 analysis ( arcprize2025_results ) crystallizes this distinction: the accuracy gap to human performance is now “primarily bottlenecked by engineering” (solvable through sufficient compute, data coverage, and verifiable feedback) while the efficiency gap remains “bottlenecked by science and ideas.” Current AI reasoning capability is fundamentally knowledge-bound : performance depends on domain coverage in training data plus verifiable task feedback. Human reasoning, by contrast, is knowledge-free in Chollet’s sense, capable of generalizing abstract principles to domains never 
    93→--36-- Current approaches that achieve the strongest reported ARC-AGI results approximate aspects of abstraction discovery without fully achieving it. Program synthesis methods seek reusable primitives but struggle with semantic grounding. Neuro-symbolic systems attempt to bridge perception and symbols but rely on hand-engineered ontologies. Test-time adaptation explores hypothesis spaces through search rather than principled abstraction. RQ2 suggests that the current progress is largely driven by scaling and refinement rather than by discovering compact, transferable abstractions. The remaining ques
    94→--37-- Compositional generalization, the ability to systematically recombine known primitives in novel ways, represents the binding constraint on current approaches. Systems achieving 70-80% on ARC-AGI-1 consistently drop to 20-30% on ARC-AGI-2 and below 15% on ARC-AGI-3 ( chollet_arc_2025 ; chollet_arc-agi-2_2025 ) . This is not gradual degradation but catastrophic failure once compositional depth exceeds system capacity. The challenge manifests through multiple failure modes. First, combinatorial explosion in search spaces makes deeper compositions intractable. ConceptSearch generates 400 candidate
    95→--38-- Third, systems exhibit brittle failure modes rather than graceful degradation. Humans confronting difficult compositional tasks attempt solutions even when uncertain, exhibiting partial success and systematic errors that reveal underlying reasoning strategies. Current AI systems show catastrophic failure: ANPL drops from 75% on ARC-AGI-1 to near-zero on harder variants with no intermediate attempts or partial solutions. This brittleness suggests fundamental differences in how humans and current AI represent compositional structure. Addressing compositional generalization likely requires mechan
    96→--39-- Program synthesis approaches discover transformation primitives, but these primitives often lack the semantic grounding that makes human concepts flexible and transferable. A human understanding of “rotation” applies to mental imagery, physical objects, abstract diagrams, and temporal sequences. Current AI primitives, by contrast, remain tied to specific instantiations, limiting their compositional utility.
    97→--40-- This manifests as the classical symbol grounding problem ( harnad_symbol_1990 ) : how do abstract symbols acquire meaning beyond formal manipulation? Symbolic AI historically suffered from symbols manipulated according to syntactic rules without semantic content, as Searle’s “Chinese Room” critique noted ( searle_minds_1980 ) . Neural networks achieve perceptual grounding but lose compositional structure. Neuro-symbolic approaches attempt to bridge this gap, but current implementations rely on hand-engineered primitive vocabularies rather than discovered abstractions.
    98→--41-- A genuine solution would enable systems to recognize when different surface forms instantiate the same abstract operation and compose primitives in novel ways not seen during training. Ouellette et al.’s neural-guided synthesis achieves 79.3% on ARC-AGI-1 ( ouellette_towards_2024 ) by learning program representations, but discovered primitives function as optimized parameters rather than understood concepts: they cannot be explained or transferred to novel domains. Promising directions include compositional abstraction discovery ( ellis_dreamcoder_2021 ) and concept learning frameworks ( lake_
    99→--42-- Jolicoeur-Martineau’s Tiny Recursive Model (TRM) achieves 45% on ARC-AGI-1 and 8% on ARC-AGI-2 with only 7M parameters, less than 0.01% of leading LLMs ( jolicoeur2025_trm ) . The architecture alternates between “think” steps ( z ← f ​ ( x , y , z ) z\leftarrow f(x,y,z) ) that accumulate latent reasoning and “act” steps ( y ← g ​ ( y , z ) y\leftarrow g(y,z) ) that refine answers, unrolled across 16 iterations. This demonstrates that recursive depth compensates for parameter count : computational depth of 42 effective layers through iteration enables generalization that massive parameter count
   100→--43-- These innovations reveal a progression: 2024’s breakthrough was test-time adaptation , adapting at inference rather than training. 2025’s theme is refinement loops , iterative correction cycles. The logical 2026 extension may be recursive abstraction discovery , systems that discover their own primitive vocabulary during inference, grounding symbols through compression rather than pretraining. The key challenge remains bridging perceptual grounding with compositional structure: TRM achieves efficient recursion but lacks symbolic interpretability; SOAR learns search strategies but requires LLM 
   101→--44-- This section situates our survey within the broader landscape of AGI research, examining theoretical foundations, alternative benchmarks, and prior documentation of ARC-AGI approaches. Zinkevich ( zinkevich_arc_slr_2025 ) presents a PRISMA-guided systematic literature screening 538 manuscripts and classifying 62 ARC Prize 2024 approaches via technique tagging and ensemble synergy analysis using task-level performance data. Our survey extends this foundation with full temporal coverage (2019-2025), cross-generation analysis spanning ARC-AGI-1, ARC-AGI-2, and ARC-AGI-3, detailed taxonomic descri
   102→--45-- Chollet’s 2019 paper “On the Measure of Intelligence” ( chollet_measure_2019 ) provided the theoretical foundation for ARC-AGI by defining intelligence as skill-acquisition efficiency , emphasizing scope, generalization difficulty, and priors rather than raw performance. This framework directly challenges benchmarks that reward capability accumulation without considering data efficiency. The cost-performance analysis in Section 4 validates this insight: systems with similar accuracy exhibit efficiency gaps exceeding three orders of magnitude.
   103→--46-- Broad AGI Evaluation Suites: Big-Bench ( srivastava_beyond_2023 ) and MMLU ( hendrycks_measuring_2021 ) assess language models across hundreds of diverse tasks spanning mathematics, science, history, and common sense reasoning. These benchmarks measure breadth of acquired knowledge and capabilities, operating in the complementary regime to ARC-AGI’s focus on few-shot generalization from minimal data. Large language models achieve ¿90% on many MMLU categories yet remain below 20% on ARC-AGI-2, demonstrating that knowledge breadth and fluid reasoning represent orthogonal challenges. Our survey f
   104→--47-- Visual Reasoning Benchmarks: RAVEN’s Progressive Matrices ( zhang_raven_2019 ) and similar abstract visual reasoning tasks share surface similarity with ARC-AGI’s grid-based format. However, RAVEN provides multiple-choice answers and emphasizes pattern recognition over transformation synthesis. While some ARC-AGI techniques transfer to these domains, the open-ended generation requirement in ARC-AGI creates fundamentally different solution constraints.
   105→--48-- From pattern matching to world modeling. Genuine intelligence requires building predictive models of environment dynamics rather than memorizing input-output mappings. World models enable counterfactual reasoning, compositional understanding, and efficient planning. ARC-AGI-3’s ( Ying2025-WorldModels ) interactive format tests these capabilities: agents must infer environmental mechanics through exploration and discover goals from sparse feedback. The failure of ARC-AGI-1-optimized systems to transfer to ARC-AGI-3 demonstrates that static reasoning misses essential aspects of intelligence requ
   106→
   107→=== p_techreport_html: 13 candidate paragraphs ===
   108→--0-- Alongside this definition, Chollet published the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) benchmark [ 6 ] (later renamed ARC-AGI to avoid name collisions with other AI benchmarks), as a first concrete attempt to measure this definition of intelligence. We will refer to this dataset as ARC-AGI-1. It is a set of independent “tasks” (see figure 1), each consisting of a number of “demonstration pairs” (two or more, with a median count of three) and one or more “test inputs”. A test pair consists of an “input grid”, a rectangular grid of variable size (up to a maximum size of 30 rows by 30 columns) w
   109→--1-- ARC-AGI tasks do not require specialized world knowledge (e.g., historical facts) nor language to solve. The only assumed prior knowledge is Core Knowledge [ 7 ] – concepts such as objectness, basic topology, elementary integer arithmetic, etc. Human Core Knowledge has been investigated by Spelke et al. [ 22 ]. These knowledge priors are acquired by children very early (typically before age four) and are universally shared by all humans. The ARC-AGI-1 public training tasks are designed to expose test-takers to all the Core Knowledge priors needed to solve ARC-AGI tasks.
   110→--2-- Public training tasks (400, easy) - Intended to demonstrate the task format and allow for learning the Core Knowledge priors.
   111→--3-- In the years following the original release of ARC-AGI-1, pure deep learning approaches turned out to perform poorly on ARC-AGI, as the classic deep learning paradigm works by relating new situations to situations seen at training time, with no adaptation or knowledge recombination at test time, making it impossible for such models to apprehend entirely novel tasks at test time. In the first Kaggle competition (2020), no deep-learning based approach scored above 1%. The original GPT-3 model from OpenAI scored 0% on the public evaluation via direct prompting.
   112→--4-- In total, 1,430 teams submitted 17,789 entries for ARC Prize 2024. Many well-funded startups have also shifted priorities to work on ARC-AGI – we’ve heard from seven such companies this year. Additionally, multiple large corporate labs have now spun up internal efforts to tackle ARC-AGI.
   113→--5-- Progress re-accelerated, however, during ARC Prize 2024, catalyzed by three major categories of approaches:
   114→--6-- Test-time training (TTT) for transductive models 1 1 1 A “transductive” model is a model that attempts to directly predict the output grid given a test input grid and a task specification, instead of first trying to write down a program that matches the task. : Fine-tuning an LLM at training time on a given ARC-AGI task specification in order to recombine the prior knowledge of the LLM into a new model adapted to the task at hand.
   115→--7-- The classical deep learning paradigm, exemplified by LLMs from the 2022-2023 period, involves first training a model on a large dataset and then performing inference with a frozen version of the model. However, solving ARC-AGI requires going beyond simple fetching and application of memorized patterns – it necessitates the ability to adapt to the specific task at hand at test time. This has led to the emergence of test-time training (TTT), also known as test-time fine-tuning (TTFT), as a dominant approach in LLM-based solutions for ARC-AGI. Today, all top LLM-based transduction approaches for 
   116→--8-- Interestingly, TTT can be seen as conceptually similar to program search, albeit at the opposite end of the memorization/recombination spectrum. Both involve recombining pre-existing building blocks to solve a task. Program search typically employs deep recombination of a small set of generic programming primitives. TTT, on the other hand, utilizes a vast number of specialized “building blocks” (vector functions found in the weights of the pretrained LLM) and performs shallow recombination through test-time gradient descent.
   117→--9-- We’re excited that ARC Prize catalyzed significant attention towards new ideas for AGI. We had expected ARC Prize to drive academics, independent researchers, and big labs alike to give renewed attention towards ARC-AGI. But we were surprised to the degree that well-funded AI research startups would change their roadmaps to prioritize beating the benchmark. We are now aware of at least seven distinct efforts to solve ARC-AGI by organizations that have greater than $1M in funding, including Basis AI ( basis.ai ), Tufa Labs ( tufalabs.ai ), Agemo ( agemo.ai ), and Symbolica ( symbolica.ai ).
   118→--10-- All of these groups do not share the same incentives (e.g., progress prizes would not be sufficient to incentivize sharing for venture-funded startups and large corporate labs), and we plan to redesign the 2025 edition of the competition to account for this. Our goal is to provide the best directional compass towards AGI across the full spectrum of AI research actors, from academic labs to startups to big labs.
   119→--11-- To address these issues while retaining the familiar task format of ARC-AGI, we are actively working on ARC-AGI-2 and our intention is to launch the new dataset along with the 2025 competition.
   120→--12-- We would also like to recognize the dedication of past ARCathon participants, who not only championed the benchmark but whose prior work brought new members of the community quickly up to speed. In particular, we thank Michael Hodel, Jack Cole, Mohamed Osman, and Simon Ouellette for their ongoing efforts to develop ARC-AGI solutions. Special recognition is due to Simon Strandgaard for his exceptional role as a community ambassador and prolific open-source contributor.
   121→
   122→=== p_results: 7 candidate paragraphs ===
   123→--0-- Classically, deep learning models are trained on input/output pairs using gradient descent to create a static neural network. This training algorithm gradually refines a high-dimensional curve in the network's latent space. Then at inference-time, when presented with a new input, the network does forward passes to approximate the output based along this curve. This basic concept, coupled with test-time adaptation and data augmentation, is responsible for the top score in ARC Prize 2024 ( ARChitects ) and 2025 ( NVARC ).
   124→--1-- We're now seeing early success with a very different training approach that directly trains neural weights to represent a task-solving program. Input/output pairs are still used as a ground truth and refinement loops play a key role in training, mirroring program synthesis approaches – but in weights space this time.
   125→--2-- One new important finding with the class of frontier commercial models released late-2025 (Gemini 3, Claude Opus 4.5, …) is that you can add refinement loops at the application layer to meaningfully improve task reliability instead of relying solely on provider reasoning systems. This still requires the foundational model to have knowledge coverage of your task domain.
   126→--3-- We've added a new category to the leaderboard called Model Refinements and have verified a new Gemini 3 Pro refinement, open sourced by Poetiq , which improves performance on ARC-AGI-2 from baseline 31%, $0.81/task up to 54%, $31/task. Notably, the same model refinement achieved similar improvements on Claude Opus 4.5 with accuracy rivaling that of Gemini 3 Pro (Ref) but at approximately twice the cost per task (~$60/task), as reported by Poetiq .
   127→--4-- We should take a moment to appreciate how strange this is! Human reasoning capability is not bound to knowledge, and this has all sorts of weird implications and leads us towards imprecise analogies like "jagged intelligence".
   128→--5-- There is a concept in machine learning called overfitting. Classically, this occurs when your model learns too much from training. It learns to memorize the exact data instead of learning the general patterns. This leads the model to perform poorly on unseen data at test time.
   129→--6-- Special recognition to founding team member Bryan Landers , who continues to support and contribute to ARC Prize and filled in at critical moments this year.
   130→
   131→=== p_nopretrain: 46 candidate paragraphs ===
   132→--0-- ## Abstract Report issue for preceding element Conventional wisdom in the age of LLMs dictates that solving IQ-test-like visual puzzles from the ARC-AGI-1 benchmark requires capabilities derived from massive pretraining. To counter this, we introduce CompressARC , a 76K parameter model without any pretraining that solves 20% of evaluation puzzles by minimizing the description length (MDL) of the target puzzle purely during inference time. The MDL endows CompressARC with extreme generalization abilities typically unheard of in deep learning. To our knowledge, CompressARC is the only deep learni
   133→--1-- The key to CompressARC’s extreme data efficiency is its formulation as a code-golfing problem: to find the shortest possible self-contained program that outputs the entire ARC-AGI dataset, with any unsolved grids filled arbitrarily. By Occam’s razor, we may expect the shortest program to fill the unsolved grids in the most sensible way, which is with “correct” solutions that match the rules of the puzzle. An overly basic program might store a hard-coded string of the puzzle data (plus arbitrary solutions) for output; but the program will be too long, implying the outputted solutions will be wr
   134→--2-- ARC-AGI-1 is an artificial intelligence benchmark designed to test a system’s ability to acquire new skills from minimal examples ( chollet2019measureintelligence ) . Each puzzle in the benchmark consists of a different hidden rule, which the system must apply to an input colored grid to produce a ground truth target colored grid. The hidden rules make use of themes like objectness, goal-directedness, numbers & counting, basic geometry, and topology. Several input-output grid pairs are given as examples to help the system figure out the hidden rule in the puzzle, and no other information is gi
   135→--3-- CompressARC tries to solve the problem of compressing the data into as short a program as possible, to obtain the puzzle solutions while keeping the program search feasible. In this case, the code must be entirely self-contained, receive no inputs, and must print out the entire ARC-AGI dataset of puzzles with any solutions filled in. It is typically infeasible to run a full algorithmic search to find the absolute shortest program, because we would have to search through a huge number of increasingly lengthy programs to find one whose printout matches our requirements. CompressARC makes program
   136→--4-- We define a search algorithm (Algorithm 2 ) which enumerates many possible seeds to place in these spaces, and selects a good set of seeds to make Algorithm 1 as short as possible, with the constraint that its outputted puzzles are the given puzzles, but the solutions are unconstrained. Most of the algorithm length will be taken up by the length of the seeds, so it suffices to only count up the total length of the seeds to approximate the program length.
   137→--5-- Puzzle/solution data format: Each puzzle takes the form of a tensor of shape [ n_example , width , height , 2], containing color designations for every pixel in the 2 × n_example 2\times\text{{n\_example}} grids. Here, n_example counts the total number of input/output grid pairs in the puzzle, including the test grid pair whose output grid is not known . The shapes listed in this section are for explanatory purposes and the actual data format is introduced in Section 4 . A naive first try at code-golfing the dataset may involve writing a program that hard-codes each puzzle in a giant string an
   138→--6-- The neural network equivariant_NN is a neural network that is “equivariant” to valid transformations of ARC-AGI puzzles. This means when the input/output pair order or colors are permuted, or a flip or rotation is applied to the input z z , then the output of the neural network will also be transformed in the same way.
   139→--7-- 8 P filled ← sample seed_error ​ ( grid_logits ) P_{\text{filled}}\leftarrow\text{sample}_{\text{seed\_error}}(\text{grid\_logits}) ; Generate puzzle
   140→--8-- Algorithm 1 Template for a short program that produce completed puzzles P filled P_{\text{filled}} with solutions filled in. Red text is to be substituted in with hard-coded values produced via Algorithm 2 . Report issue for preceding element
   141→--9-- The template program allows for two pseudo-random sampling seeds to be filled in for every puzzle (lines 3 and 7). The resulting printed puzzles can be guaranteed to match the true puzzles in the dataset by manipulating the final seed in line 7, which works after choosing any seed on line 3. With this guarantee in place, we can sum up the length of the code for the template, and find that the total length varies based on the number of bits/digits required to write down the two seeds. So, in order to search for short programs, we just need to make all the seeds as short as possible.
   142→--10-- 14 P filled ← sample seed_error ​ ( grid_logits ) P_{\text{filled}}\leftarrow\text{sample}_{\text{seed\_error}}(\text{grid\_logits}) ;
   143→--11-- Algorithm 2 Minimize Description Length, a.k.a. code-golf. n_example denotes the total number of input/output pairs in the puzzle, including the test pair where the output is unknown. Line 11: The smallest possible seed_error is picked so that the sampled puzzle P filled P_{\text{filled}} on line 12 matches the true puzzle P P on both the input and output grids of demonstration pairs, as well as the test inputs, but with no restriction on the test outputs. Report issue for preceding element
   144→--12-- 17 P filled ← sample ​ ( grid_logits ) P_{\text{filled}}\leftarrow\text{sample}(\text{grid\_logits}) ;
   145→--13-- Since ARC-AGI puzzles would be just as likely to appear in any combination of input/output example orderings, colors, orientations, etc., we want our network to assign them all equal probability by default. So, we made our architecture equivariant to example permutations, color permutations, rotations, and flips; ( pmlr-v48-cohenc16 ) guaranteeing that computations applied to transformed inputs result in equivalently transformed outputs. For any asymmetries a puzzle may have, we require Algorithm 3 to manipulate the seed of the random input z z , to bias the outputted puzzle one way or another
   146→--14-- Figure 3: Core structure of CompressARC’s neural network, which operates on multitensor data. Individual operations (colored) read and write to a residual backbone through learned projections (grey) in the channel dimension. The network is equivariant to permutations of indices along the other, non- channel dimensions as a result. Some layers like cummax break certain geometric symmetries, giving the architecture specific geometric abilities listed in Appendix H . Normalization, softmax, shift, and directional layers are not shown. Report issue for preceding element
   147→--15-- taking a cumulative max along one of the geometric dimensions of a tensor, (see Appendix D.4 )
   148→--16-- shifting by one pixel along one of the geometric dimensions of a tensor, (see Appendix D.4 )
   149→--17-- Table 1: Comparison of solution accuracies of various methods for ARC-AGI-1, sorted by the amount of training data used. Each method makes two solution guesses per puzzle, and a guess is only correct if the grid shape and pixel colors are all correct. The U-Net ( ronneberger2015u ) baseline is a supervised model trained during inference time on only the demonstration input/output pairs of grids in the test puzzle to match the constraints of CompressARC; details in Appendix I .
   150→--18-- (b) [ direction , color , channel ] tensor. A similar style PCA decomposition: the graph shows the top principal component for this tensor. The four brightest pixels identify blue with up, green with left, red with down, and yellow with right. This tensor tells each direction which color to use for the opposite edge’s box. The top principal component is 829 times stronger than the next principal component. Report issue for preceding element
   151→--19-- An older class of methods consists of hard-coded, large-scale searches through program spaces in hand-written domain-specific languages designed specifically for ARC ( hodel2024arc ; odouard2024arc ) . While these methods do not use neural networks to solve puzzles and are less instructive towards the field of machine learning, they share the commonality of using heavily engineered components designed specifically for ARC-AGI.
   152→--20-- Our equivariance structures are inspired by permutation-invariant neural networks, which are a type of equivariant neural network ( zaheer2018deepsets ; cohen2016groupequivariantconvolutionalnetworks ) . Equivariance transformations are taken from common augmentations to ARC-AGI puzzles.
   153→--21-- For the seed_error term, Algorithm 2 manipulates the seed to sample a puzzle P P from a distribution implied by some logits. This is effectively the same as sampling grid_logits ∼ Categorical_distribution ​ ( logits ) \text{grid\_logits}\sim\text{Categorical\_distribution}(\text{logits}) and manipulating the seed to try to get grid_logits ∼ Delta_distribution ​ ( P ) \text{grid\_logits}\sim\text{Delta\_distribution}(P) . Then, the same KL-based bound on required seed length can be used once again. The expected seed_error length is at most
   154→--22-- KL ( Delta_distribution ( P ) | | Categorical_distribution ( logits ) ) + log ( 1 + c ) − log c \displaystyle\text{KL}(\text{Delta\_distribution}(P)||\text{Categorical\_distribution}(\text{logits})){+\log(1+c)-\log c}
   155→--23-- 𝔼 x ∼ Delta_distribution ​ ( P ) ​ [ log ⁡ δ ​ ( x = P ) Categorical_probability ​ ( x ; logits ) ] + log ⁡ ( 1 + c ) − log ⁡ c \displaystyle\mathbb{E}_{x\sim\text{Delta\_distribution}(P)}\left[\log\frac{\delta(x=P)}{\text{Categorical\_probability}(x;\text{logits})}\right]+{\log(1+c)-\log c}
   156→--24-- = \displaystyle= log ⁡ δ ​ ( P = P ) Categorical_probability ​ ( P ; logits ) + log ⁡ ( 1 + c ) − log ⁡ c \displaystyle\log\frac{\delta(P=P)}{\text{Categorical\_probability}(P;\text{logits})}{+\log(1+c)-\log c}
   157→--25-- = \displaystyle= − log ⁡ Categorical_probability ​ ( P ; logits ) + log ⁡ ( 1 + c ) − log ⁡ c \displaystyle-\log\text{Categorical\_probability}(P;\text{logits}){+\log(1+c)-\log c}
   158→--26-- Most common classes of machine learning architectures operate on a single type of tensor with constant rank. LLMs operate on rank-3 tensors of shape [ n_batch , n_tokens , n_channels ], and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) operate on rank-4 tensors of shape [ n_batch , n_channels , height , width ]. Our multitensors are a set of varying-rank tensors of unique type, whose dimensions are a subset of a rank-6 tensor of shape [ n_example , n_colors , n_directions , height , width , n_channels ], as illustrated in Figure 8 . We always keep the channel dimension, so there are at most 32 tensors 
   159→--27-- When we apply an operation on a multitensor, we by default assume that all non- channel dimensions are treated identically as batch dimensions by default. The operation is copied across the indices of dimensions unless specified. This ensures that we keep all our symmetries intact until we use a specific layer meant to break a specific symmetry.
   160→--28-- This layer’s job is to sample a multitensor z z and bound its information content, before it is passed to the next layer. This layer and outputs the KL divergence between the learned z z distribution and N ​ ( 0 , I ) N(0,I) . Penalizing the KL prevents CompressARC from learning a distribution for z z that memorizes the ARC-AGI puzzle in an uncompressed fashion, and forces CompressARC to represent the puzzle more succinctly. Specifically, it forces the network to spend more bits on the KL whenever it uses z z to break a symmetry, and the larger the symmetry group broken, the more bits it spend
   161→--29-- The directional cummax and shift layers allow the network to perform the non-equivariant cummax and shift operations in an equivariant way, namely by applying the operations once per direction, and only letting the output be influenced by the results once the directions are aggregated back together (by the multitensor communication layer). These layers are the sole reason we included the direction dimension when defining a multitensor: to store the results of directional layers and operate on each individually. Of course, this means when we apply a spatial equivariance transformation, we must 
   162→--30-- By default, the network is equivariant to permutations of the eight directions, but we only want symmetry up to rotations and flips. So, this layer provides a way to send information between two slices in the direction dimension, depending on the angular difference in the two directions. This layer defines a separate linear map to be used for each of the 64 possible combinations of angles, but the weights of the linear maps are minimally tied such that the directional communication layer is equivariant to reflections and rotations. This gets complicated really fast, since the direction dimensi
   163→--31-- The colors of every pixel for every example for both input and output, have logits defined by the [ example , color , height , width , channel ] tensor, with the channel dimension linearly mapped down to a size of 2, representing the input and output grids. 9 9 9 The linear map is initialized to be identical for both the input and output grid, but isn’t fixed this way during learning. Sometimes this empirically helps with problems of inconsistent input vs output grid shapes. The bias on this linear map is multiplied by 100 before usage, otherwise it doesn’t seem to be learned fast enough empir
   164→--32-- For grids of non-constant shape, the [ example , height , channel ] and [ example , width , channel ] tensors are used to create distributions over possible contiguous rectangular slices of each grid of colors, as shown in Figure 11 . Again, the channel dimension is mapped down to a size of 2 for input and output grids. For every grid, we have a vector of size [ width ] [\text{{width}}] and a vector of size [ height ] [\text{{height}}] . The log likelihood of every slice of the vector is taken to be the sum of the values within the slice, minus the values outside the slice. The log likelihoods
   165→--33-- ## E.2 Weight Tying for Reflection/Rotation Symmetry Report issue for preceding element
   166→--34-- When applying a different linear layer to every tensor in a multitensor, we have a linear layer for tensors having a width but not height dimension, and another linear layer for tensors having a height but not width dimension. Whenever this is the case, we tie the weights together in order to preserve the whole network’s equivariance to diagonal reflections and 90 degree rotations, which swap the width and height dimensions.
   167→--35-- The softmax layer is not completely symmetrized because different indices of the output correspond to different combinations of dimension to softmax over. Tying the weights properly would be a bit complicated and time consuming for the performance improvement we expect, so we did not do this.
   168→--36-- Based on rules 1 and 3, we try to predict the shape of held-out outputs, prioritizing rule 1 over rule 3. If either rule holds, we force the postprocessing step to only consider the predicted shape by overwriting the masks produced by the linear head layer. If neither rule holds, we make a temporary prediction of the largest width and height out of the grids in the given ARC-AGI puzzle, and we allow the masks to predict shapes that are smaller than that.
   169→--37-- In addition, black is treated as a special color that is never included in the multitensor, since it normally represents the background in many puzzles. When performing color classification, a tensor of zeros is appended to the color dimension after applying the linear head, to represent logits for the black color.
   170→--38-- At every iteration, count up the sampled answer, as well as the exponential moving average answer (decay = 0.97 =0.97 ).
   171→--39-- If before 150 iterations of training, then downweight the answer by a factor of e − 10 e^{-10} . (Effectively, don’t count the answer.)
   172→--40-- Translation, rotation, reflections, rescaling, image duplication (see puzzles 0e206a2e , 5ad4f10b , and 2bcee788 )
   173→--41-- The training algorithm for the baseline consists of feeding each input grid into the U-Net and using the U-Net output to classify the pixel color of the output grid. Puzzles where the input grid and output grid did not match shape were skipped and assumed to receive a score of zero. The most common two output grids occurring in the second half of the 10000 steps of training were used as the two solution guesses.
   174→--42-- We experimented with applying a random augmentation transformation to the input grids and reversing the transformation on the output before computing the loss and/or ensembling predictions, but we discarded this idea due to worse performance on the training set (2.5% without augmentations, 1% with augmentations).
   175→--43-- Convolutions, when repeated with some grids flipped by 180 degrees, tend to create high activations at the center pixel, so sometimes it is important to zero out the center pixel to preserve the signal.
   176→--44-- Numbers & counting : Objects can be counted or sorted by their shape, appearance, or movement using basic mathematics like addition, subtraction, and comparison.
   177→--45-- Basic geometry & topology : Objects can be shapes like rectangles, triangles, and circles which can be mirrored, rotated, translated, deformed, combined, repeated, etc. Differences in distances can be detected.
   178→
   179→=== p_procedural: 9 candidate paragraphs ===
   180→--0-- ## Abstract Report issue for preceding element This work presents code to procedurally generate examples for the ARC training tasks [ 1 ] [ 2 ] . For each of the 400 tasks, an example generator following the transformation logic of the original examples was created. In effect, the assumed underlying distribution of examples for any given task was reverse engineered by implementing a means to sample from it. An attempt was made to cover an as large as reasonable space of possible examples for each task. That is, whenever the original examples of a given task may be limited in their diversity e.
   181→--1-- Each generator is a standalone Python function merely making use of the DSL and functions from the random module from the standard library. The median generator consists of 40 lines of code and uses 22 DSL primitive calls and 10 calls to the random module [ 3 ] . Even though there is a great degree of overlap in the utilized techniques across the generators, no separate utilities were created, apart from a wrapper around the random function for controlling example difficulty. The interface of every generator is simple, in that, when called, it returns a single example. Some of the strategies u
   182→--2-- As the notion of objects is crucial to many ARC tasks, generating and placing objects was frequently required. Typically, to generate a random object, first a size of the object in terms of number of pixels was sampled, and then - conditional on some notion of adjacency and maximum height and width of the object - neighboring pixel were iteratively added to the object, and then the object was colored. To place objects on grids, commonly one of two strategies was employed. The first is rejection sampling, i.e. selecting a still unoccupied location and verifying that placing the object there doe
   183→--3-- Oftentimes, where possible, the requirement for a certain specific orientation - e.g. with respect to rotation or mirroring - was abstracted away, and to keep the generation process simple, variation in the orientation was simply introduced by applying respective transformation functions to both the input and output grid at the end of the generation process - as opposed to accounting for the possible orientations already during the process of drawing onto grids, which may unnecessarily complicate the implementation without adding functionality.
   184→--4-- Furthermore, for some tasks, the underlying transformation is an invertible function, and for some of those, the inverse is more straight-forward to implement. For such tasks, as opposed to sampling some input grid and then applying some transformation to it - or, as was very frequently done, constructing both the input grid in tandem - the output grid was usually generated first and then the inverse transformation was applied to arrive at the input grid.
   185→--5-- It was deemed crucial to have some means of ensuring a high quality of the generated examples. However, assessing the quality of the generated examples manually is in general highly infeasible due to their potential numerosity as well as the human tendency to make mistakes, especially careless mistakes for more involved examples. Therefore, each generator goes alongside a corresponding verifier. A verifier is simply a task-specific function that transforms any input grid that is valid for that task to its correct corresponding output grid. Hence, the verifiers can be used to keep only generate
   186→--6-- While this means to control example difficulty could allow for tailored datasets or curricula building during the generation process, it is, for the reasons explained above, brittle to some degree. Hence, it is suggested - depending on the experimental setup - to also or instead consider the alternative of controlling for example difficulty in a post-hoc manner, where examples are filtered or ordered after the generation, based on some other metrics. Two metrics of difficulty, each in range [ 0 , 1 ] 0 1 [0,1] [ 0 , 1 ] , are provided: Firstly, the RNG-Difficulty defined as the average of the 
   187→--7-- For about a third of the tasks, the number of symbols that occur in each example is fixed. Over half the tasks however have at least 6 different values for number of symbols an example may take on. Such tasks could be used to conduct experiments for investigating the capabilities of models to generalize to examples containing n 𝑛 n italic_n symbols, after having been trained on examples containing less than n 𝑛 n italic_n symbols. Furthermore, almost all of the tasks have at least 10 different values for the number of pixels an example may take on, and the vast majority of tasks have at least 
   188→--8-- Note that the true underlying transformation logic as arguably the only or at least by far most crucial defining characteristic of a task is not well-defined. The overall aim was to have the widest possible interpretation of the transformation logic for any given task, such that most individuals only familiar with the original examples could solve any generated example within three guesses. However, this is not guaranteed. The generalized task is simply defined as the set of pairs of input and output grids producible by the generator for which the verifier function, when applied to the input g
   189→
   190→=== p_naumenko: 20 candidate paragraphs ===
   191→--0-- - Subscribe Sign in Discover more from I Solve Intelligence - it's Symbolic In this post, we start unraveling the mystery of intelligence by proposing its "atoms". Subscribe By subscribing, you agree Substack's Terms of Use , and acknowledge its Information Collection Notice and Privacy Policy . Already have an account? Sign in ## Algorithm for ARC Challenge Alexander Naumenko Jul 19, 2024 10 2 Share In his 2019 paper "On the Measure of Intelligence" ( https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.01547 ), François Chollet, an AI researcher from Google, proposed Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus for Artificial Ge
   192→--1-- In short, in each task, we are given a 2d array of maximum size 30x30 that may contain digits from 0 to 9. According to some transformation, the input array transforms into an output array with the same limitations, but the output array may be of different size and may contain different digits or in different positions. There are only a few examples provided for an AI system to figure out the transformation and based on those findings the system has to transform a provided test input array.
   193→--2-- Sounds simple? It seems so if we take into account that humans easily solve more than 80% of tasks. But think again. The challenge is to program or train an AI system so that it can solve the challenge without any help from humans. So far, the best score on Kaggle is 41%, which is far from ideal.
   194→--3-- The author of the challenge believes that the program that will break the 85% threshold will most likely demonstrate novel approaches and may contribute to the development of AGI. François Chollet proposes to use some form of program synthesis when a task transformation is broken down into primitive transformations, each one of which may be easily implemented. Then the system will only need to "somehow" determine the combination of basic transformations to apply in each task. Basically, we only need that "somehow". This is what we will discuss in this post.
   195→--4-- Many tasks use 0s as background and other digits to represent "objects" - groups of "pixels". Then the abovementioned transformations are "actions" applied to "objects". In this particular example, the transformation includes several primitive ones - movement, scaling, crop.
   196→--5-- Let's express the same in terms of properties. "Objects" are different from the background. They are characterized by a bounding rectangle, coordinates, "color", scale factor, etc. How can we tell that "movement" was applied? Because the relative positions of two objects changed. What about scaling? Can we compare blue objects in input and output? No, but we can try to scale up its input version and then compare them. Or we can check the output object and confirm that it can be scaled down to the input one. What about crop? The crop transformation changes the array dimensions, which is observe
   197→--6-- Transformations not only change properties. They have their own properties. For example, "movement" needs "direction" and "distance" along with an "object". Scale needs an object and a scale ratio. Crop needs a rectangular area to keep. In this example, there is always a yellow rectangular edge in input and output arrays. The other object of "whatever non-background color" moves to the center of the yellow rectangular area. That area also defines the scale ratio for that object as well as coordinates for the crop operation.
   198→--7-- ## Generalization "Whatever non-background color" is the first example of generalization. Let me remind you how I define it - the process of specialization introduces defining differences of subclasses, the process of generalization "forgets" differences to return to the parent class level.
   199→--8-- Generalization applies to transformations as well. Movement may be for a fixed distance or for a distance defined by some object, in the same direction or in the one dependent on some factor, but if we observe a change in position (relative or absolute) we may suspect that movement was involved.
   200→--9-- "Object" is not only a set of pixels, it is also edges and vertexes, inside pixels and outside neighbors, quarters, symmetry, non-background colors statistics, "holes", and much more.
   201→--10-- The same is true for transformations. When we observe smaller dimensions of output arrays, we may suspect crop. But what about downscaling? There are also other transformations that lead to the same result. Can we differentiate crop from downscaling based on smaller dimensions only? No. But smaller dimensions filter out other transformations. To differentiate further we need additional properties. For example, scale ratios of objects. Crop does not affect them compared to downscaling.
   202→--11-- Some objects mirrored are not different from those rotated by 180 degrees. Both are good as our initial options. Consider other examples to finalize the proper one.
   203→--12-- ## Conditionals Many tasks use what we can call conditionals or mapping. Given one shape color the other object in one color, given the other shape color that object differently. We can track the variability of options and mapped values in some kind of data structure (map, dictionary - depends on your programming language) but we need to have representations of colors, shapes, and other properties fitting for the use in those data structures.
   204→--13-- 2. Based on that information find differences imposed on the input array and its objects. Use those differences to filter out transformations that are not involved. At this stage, many hypotheses are OK. Also, form hypotheses about the source of parameters of each transformation.
   205→--14-- 4. Figure out the sequence of basic transformation. Prepare the grand transformation.
   206→--15-- 5. Set up an Expecto class about what objects to expect in a test input and what properties of those objects to pay attention to.
   207→--16-- 6. Apply the grand transformation and Expecto class to a test input.
   208→--17-- ## The List of Basic Transformations The list below is my view on the basic transformations used in the ARC Challenge. Surely, I tried to populate it with items that are different, rely on different properties, and affect different properties. Feel free to add other items you may find fitting.
   209→--18-- 13. Replacing is about replacing one thing with a different one (color for color or shape for symmetry axis - it can be anything).
   210→--19-- Each of those transformations affects some properties. Observing respective changes from inputs to outputs hints at the possible use of that primitive.
   211→
   212→=== p_arcagi2: 5 candidate paragraphs ===
   213→--0-- You signed in with another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You signed out in another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You switched accounts on another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session.
   214→--1-- The training tasks are intended to demonstrate the task format and the Core Knowledge priors used by ARC-AGI. They can be used for training AI models. The public evaluation tasks are intended for testing AI models that have never seen these tasks before. Average human performance on these tasks in our test sample was 66%.
   215→--2-- - data/training : contains the task files for training (1000 tasks). Use these to prototype your algorithm or to train your algorithm to acquire ARC-relevant cognitive priors. This set combines tasks from ARC-AGI-1 as well as new tasks.
   216→--3-- When looking at a task, a test-taker has access to inputs & outputs of the demonstration pairs, plus the input(s) of the test pair(s). The goal is to construct the output grid(s) corresponding to the test input grid(s), using 3 trials for each test input. "Constructing the output grid" involves picking the height and width of the output grid, then filling each cell in the grid with a symbol (integer between 0 and 9, which are visualized as colors). Only exact solutions (all cells match the expected answer) can be said to be correct.
   217→--4-- - Floodfill: click on a cell from the output grid to color all connected cells to the selected color. "Connected cells" are contiguous cells with the same color.
   218→